Hello everyone.

Companies like message bird, cloudflare and even CERN are using CH in production.
Why?

Well it super fast ans scalable.
some cool numbers from Yandex as of 2017

-- slide change

25 trillions of rows
500 servers
total throughput of query processing is up to two terabytes per second

One of the reason is underlying techonlogy: CODB

-- slide change

What is CODB and why do I want it?
A column-oriented database stores each column continuously. each column will be stored
in sequential blocks.
What does it give us? it gives us data locality for starters

Which we can visualise like this.

-- slide change

This image was borrowed khm, from Yandex's docs.
Data locality has great benefits when we store on hard drives,
Hard drives provide optimal performace for sequential access

Also, CH and CODB are designed to make use of Memory Alignemnt

-- slide change

I've included great article from towardsdatascience for deeper yet digestible dive
into this technique. As an example, with the help of memory alignment we can store
S2 in only 24 bytes instead of 40 bytes for S1. It has to do with bits padding where we
loose 7 bytes for every boolean value.

Exciting stuff

-- slide change

And again Yandex provides some nice gifs to illustrate optimal usage of resources possible with CODB

In typical row oriented DB we need to process large ammount of unneded data

-- slide change

In CODB we get only the data we need, less memory and, if we get it right, less CPU

So underlying technology is good then. How about implementation?

-- slide change

Well CH has good and bad parts about it, of course

To summarise the slide. You can put and process stuff in if FAST.
Need more power get more nodes.

-- slide change

CH bad parts: this is not transactional DB. Consistency is not guarantted.
Joins are not great, but there are workarouns)
When it comes to deletion We've tried to delete 60G on a test ch.
Didn' go very well.
you can do it, but test it with your data and your setup first.
Remember CH is not designed for deletion, so maybe just stay away.

If you think this technology covers your requirements, please hope it for a journey.

-- slide change

See you next lesson.

TODO: POSSIBLY LINK: Scales very well vertically
TODO: POSSIBLY LINK: Horizontally scalable