Preparation:
* put down all dockers
* slides in desktop
* browser with tabix
* browser with ch docs merge tree
* browser with bug in git
* start ch in backgroud
* delete data folder

Hello everyone,
In this lesson we'll talk about merge-tree family of CH engines

We'll talk about when and why to use engines of this family,
Among other usefull things

CH team reccomends using engines of this family pretty much for most tasks
They say those engines are the most advanced and feature reach
and data replication is possible only with engines from this family

There are other engines as well, and we'll talk about them in due time, but chances are
you'll start with some kind of merge tree table and stick to it for a long time

So what is so special about these engines?
When you insert bunch and bunch of data in CH,
Merge tree will put all the files wherever it can, and then merge them in background,
Rewriting data is very expensive, and clikhouse doesn't do it to save time.
It just remembers where to look for parts

for us the whole process stays ... dark magic. Which is good.
All we see is that data is being injected. Fast.

-- switch to tabix

I'm already connected to our newly configured ch instance with lovely tabix
Now let's try to create a table and a database

And yes, as the comment suggests we'll fail.
Why? because cool kinds don't read the docs, ha

and the reason why it fails is that we need to let CH know about
some of the configs for this table

-- show docs merge tree

These configs will be the main focus of this lecture

-- tabix second tab

If we look at the second tab,
(all the code you'll find in course files)
you'll notice that there are of course different
ways to setup partitionain and order by clouses

we can partition by time expression which would yield a name like this

-- type 201901

You can refer to this partition with such a name to say delete or detach it at a later time by the way

we can also specify an expression in order by clause,
like so

confusing

What is event worse, is that in older days docs would say

-- show the bug report

that we have to have a separete column for date and for time.

So what do we do?

Well in the next lesson we will benchmark different setups and then try to make sense of it

-- change to slides with summary

As of now we'll wrap. I'll just summarize by saying that for such a powerful
table we have to specify surprisingly small amount of details at a creation time.
And CH will take care of the rest.


Join in me on a journey to determine the coolest setup for merge tree in the next video.
see you next time.